POET-IT — DETAILED GUIDE

Poet-it is a poetry editor that keeps every poem in a Git repository under
~/Documents/Poet-it, so each saved version stays recoverable. The right margin
shows a live syllable count for every line, with a rhyme-scheme letter beside
it.

CONTENTS
  1. Where poems live — the repository
  2. The editing surface
  3. Syllable counts and rhyme scheme
  4. Toolbar tools
  5. The dependency diagram and its tag legends
  6. Versions and files
  7. Appearance
  8. Support and standards

1. WHERE POEMS LIVE — THE REPOSITORY
------------------------------------
This is the first thing about Poet-it that works differently from an ordinary
editor, so it comes first.

Poet-it does not edit files scattered around your disk. Every poem it manages
lives in one folder — the repository — at ~/Documents/Poet-it, created (with
a demo poem) the first time it is needed. The repository is version-
controlled: each time you choose Make Version, the poem's current state is
committed to its history, and the Version Tree can return you to any
committed state. That protection exists only inside the repository, which is
why the editor steers all file operations there:

  Open      With a repository present, Open lists the repository's poems
            rather than showing a file dialog — poems live there, so that
            is where opening starts.

  Import    Brings an outside .txt file in. The file is COPIED into the
            repository — your original stays where it was, untouched — then
            opened and committed at once, so its arrival is the first entry
            in its history. If a poem with that name already exists, the
            import gets a numbered name instead of overwriting anything.

  Export    Hands a copy back out. The poem is saved, then written to the
            location you choose, together with its .meta styling sidecar.
            An export is a snapshot, not a link: edits you make afterwards
            stay in the repository until you export again.

If you keep poems elsewhere, the working pattern is: Import once, edit and
version inside the repository, and Export whenever you need a copy outside
it.

2. THE EDITING SURFACE
----------------------
Type as you would in any editor. A few keys act on whole lines:
  Enter               Split the line at the cursor (new line below)
  Up / Down           Move between lines
  Shift+Up / Down     Select whole lines (then Cut / Copy)
  Backspace at col 0  Merge the line into the one above
  Right at line end   Adds a trailing space, for free-form layout

3. SYLLABLE COUNTS AND RHYME SCHEME
-----------------------------------
Syllable count (grey margin, right of each line) is read from the bundled CMU
Pronouncing Dictionary (cmudict); words it does not list fall back to NLTK's
SyllableTokenizer.

Rhyme-scheme letter (far-right column): two lines share a letter (A, B, C …)
when their final words share the phoneme suffix from the last stressed vowel
onward, computed from cmudict. Blank lines get no letter.

4. TOOLBAR TOOLS
----------------
Meter       Replaces each line in place with a stress-marked version of
            itself; click Meter again to restore the original text. Capital
            letters mark stressed syllables and a centre dot separates
            syllables. Scansion uses the `prosodic` package when it is installed
            (stressed / unstressed only) and an NLTK-based heuristic otherwise;
            the NLTK path additionally marks secondary stress with a leading
            capital. It runs in a background thread so the editor stays
            responsive while the rows fill in.

Rhyme       With the cursor on a word, lists words that rhyme with it; click an
            entry to drop it into the line in place of that word. A useful
            workflow: type any word that already carries the rhyme you intend,
            put the cursor on it, then choose the word you actually want from
            the list. With no line in focus, a field appears beside the button
            — type a word and press Enter to see its rhymes for reference only.
            Rhymes come from cmudict; a word cmudict does not know is looked
            up through the closest similarly spelled word instead, and the
            list says so.

Definition  Definitions for the word at the cursor, grouped by part of speech,
            each with synonyms and example sentences. Drawn from WordNet (via
            the NLTK corpus).

Thesaurus   Synonyms for the word at the cursor, from a bundled MyThes-format
            English thesaurus (th_en_US). Click a synonym to replace the word.

Spell       Toggles inline spell-checking, backed by the `pyspellchecker`
            package. Misspelled words gain a red underline; hover one for
            suggestions and click a suggestion to apply it.

Recite      A button at the right end of the menu line. Reads the whole poem
            aloud with the espeak-ng synthesizer — entirely offline, no
            accounts or cloud services. The button stays pressed while
            speaking; click it again to stop mid-poem.

            The voice is configurable in ~/.poet-it/state.json, under
            "recite" (written with its defaults on first use):
              voice      espeak-ng voice id — `espeak-ng --voices=en`
              variant    timbre overlay from espeak-ng-data/voices/!v,
                         e.g. "f3", "m5", "whisper"
              speed      words per minute (default 140)
              pitch      0-99 (null = espeak's default, 50)
              amplitude  0-200 (null = espeak's default, 100)
              word_gap   pause between words, in 10 ms units (espeak -g)
              capitals   pitch raise for capital letters, Hz (espeak -k)
            The POET_IT_VOICE environment variable, if set, overrides the
            configured voice+variant. Note the snap edition reads its own
            copy: ~/snap/poet-it/current/.poet-it/state.json.

Diagram     Draws a dependency-parse diagram of the sentence at the cursor —
            see section 5. By default this uses a bundled UDPipe English model
            (no download). For more accurate parses, install the optional
            "quality mode": Stanza's biaffine parser. It is opt-in because it
            pulls in PyTorch (~1.7 GB) and downloads its own English model
            (~500 MB) on first use; install it with

                pip install "poet-it[quality]"
                python -c "import stanza; stanza.download('en', package='ewt')"

            When present, poet-it uses Stanza automatically and falls back to the
            bundled UDPipe model otherwise.

5. THE DEPENDENCY DIAGRAM AND ITS TAG LEGENDS
---------------------------------------------
Each word sits on the baseline. A curved arrow runs from every head word to
its dependent and is labelled with the grammatical relation between them; the
one word that depends on nothing is marked `root`. Below the picture, an
annotation row repeats each word with its relation and its part of speech.

The annotation follows the Universal Dependencies (UD) scheme — the same labels
used in CoNLL-U treebank files — as produced by UDPipe or, in quality mode,
Stanza. Two part-of-speech
tag sets appear: the abbreviation printed under each word in the diagram is the
language-specific Penn Treebank tag (XPOS), while the annotation row shows the
universal tag (UPOS).

Universal POS tags (UPOS) — shown in the annotation row
    ADJ    adjective                  NUM    numeral
    ADP    adposition (preposition)   PART   particle
    ADV    adverb                     PRON   pronoun
    AUX    auxiliary verb             PROPN  proper noun
    CCONJ  coordinating conjunction   PUNCT  punctuation
    DET    determiner                 SCONJ  subordinating conjunction
    INTJ   interjection               VERB   verb
    NOUN   noun                       X      other

Penn Treebank tags (XPOS) — printed under each word in the diagram
    NN   noun, singular               JJ   adjective
    NNS  noun, plural                 RB   adverb
    NNP  proper noun, singular        PRP  personal pronoun
    DT   determiner                   CD   cardinal number
    IN   preposition / sub. conj.     TO   the word "to"
    VB   verb, base form              VBD  verb, past tense
    VBZ  verb, 3rd-person singular    VBG  verb, gerund / present participle

Dependency relations — the arc labels
    root    head of the whole sentence (depends on nothing)
    nsubj   nominal subject            cc      coordinating conjunction
    obj     direct object              conj    conjunct
    iobj    indirect object            aux     auxiliary
    det     determiner                 cop     copula
    case    case marker (preposition   mark    subordinating marker
            or possessive 's)          amod    adjectival modifier
    nmod    nominal modifier           advmod  adverbial modifier
    nummod  numeric modifier           acl     clausal modifier of a noun
    appos   appositional modifier              (incl. relative clauses)
            (a renaming phrase)        advcl   adverbial clause
    obl     oblique nominal            punct   punctuation

The complete tag inventories are defined by the Universal Dependencies project;
the lists above cover the tags you will meet most often.

6. VERSIONS AND FILES
---------------------
Make Version   Commits the current poem with a message (pre-filled with a
               timestamp). Save a new poem first so it has a file to commit.
Version Tree   Lists every committed version of the current poem; click one to
               load it. Unsaved edits prompt a Commit / Discard choice first.

New / Save / Save As behave as usual, steered into the repository. Open and
Browse Repository list the poems in ~/Documents/Poet-it. Import and Export
move copies across the repository boundary — section 1 explains the
distinction and why it matters.

7. APPEARANCE
-------------
The Font, Size and Theme menus restyle the editor. Themes can be edited or
created from Theme > Edit Themes…, and your selection is remembered between
sessions.

8. SUPPORT AND STANDARDS
------------------------
Dependency annotation follows Universal Dependencies
(universaldependencies.org) in the CoNLL-U format. Questions and bug reports:
{ISSUES_URL}
